Declaration engine (#11)
FuelLabs/sway-rfcs: rfcs/0003-declaration-engine.md

- Feature Name: Declaration Engine
- Start Date: 2022-07-13
- RFC PR: [FuelLabs/sway-rfcs#0011](https://github.com/FuelLabs/sway-rfcs/pull/11)
- Sway Issue: [FueLabs/sway#1821](https://github.com/FuelLabs/sway/issues/1821), [FueLabs/sway#1692](https://github.com/FuelLabs/sway/issues/1692)

# Summary

[summary]: #summary

> With it's current design, the Sway compiler faces challenges regarding how declarations interact with the type system and code generation. These include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With its current design, the Sway compiler faces challenges regarding how declarations interact with the type system and code generation. These include:
```

3. it is currently impossible to implement `where` clauses without extensive special casing/dummy definitions ([FueLabs/sway#970](https://github.com/FuelLabs/sway/issues/970))

This RFC proposes a solution to this---the "declaration engine". The declaration engine is a redesign of how the compiler thinks about type checking of declarations, and seeks to solve the problems described above. At a high level, the declaration engine stores intermediate representations of potentially type-checked declarations and allows the compiler to refer to those intermediate representations during type checking.

# Motivation

[motivation]: #motivation

With the changes introduced by this RFC, the compiler will be able to think about declarations more abstractly and will not be required to inline AST nodes during type checking. In addition to solving the issues above, I believe that this change will create a mechanism in the compiler which will allow us to implement additional optimizations in the future.

# Guide-level explanation

[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

Because this is an internal compiler RFC, the affected group is the Sway compiler devs.

> Specifically in the context of Sway terminology, the phrase "type checking" is often used to refer to the Sway compiler step in which untyped AST nodes are transformed to typed AST nodes. But really, the compier step we refer to "type checking" is actually doing type inference. This distinction is important because it allows us to understand the role of the declaration engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifically in the context of Sway terminology, the phrase "type checking" is often used to refer to the Sway compiler step in which untyped AST nodes are transformed to typed AST nodes. But really, the compiler step we refer to "type checking" is actually doing type inference. This distinction is important because it allows us to understand the role of the declaration engine.
```

> Specifically in the context of Sway terminology, the phrase "type checking" is often used to refer to the Sway compiler step in which untyped AST nodes are transformed to typed AST nodes. But really, the compier step we refer to "type checking" is actually doing type inference. This distinction is important because it allows us to understand the role of the declaration engine.

Reviewer: I believe what we refer to as semantic analysis is performing _both_ type checking and type inference, right? Not just type inference.

Author: Good catch!

> ## Toy Example

Reviewer: Since this isn't really an example of what you are proposing, and is rather a description of a related concept, maybe we could title this section differently.
```suggestion
## Background Information: Sway's Type Inference
```

> (this is an elaborate explanation that most will already be profficient in---but it does build to a good point!)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(this is an elaborate explanation that most will already be proficient in---but it does build to a good point!)
```

> For the purposes of illustration, imagine a new toy language that is statically and strongly typed, but allows for optional type annotations (like Sway and Rust). The toy compiler that we could write for this toy language would need to evaluate the types of objects at compile time to either correctly compile a program or fail to compile a program (like the Sway compiler and the Rust compiler). The toy compiler would have three broad-strokes steps (1) parsing, (2) type checking, and (3) code generation. Because the toy language allows for optional type annotations, after the parsing step, the toy compiler would know the types for either none, some, or all, of the objects in the program. To compensate for this, the toy compiler would perform type inference, where the types of untyped objects would be inferred from the types of typed objects. 

Reviewer: I think `object` here is an ill-defined term, perhaps we  use the word item or expression? Or define what an object is?

Author: Expression is a better word.

With these three constraints, the toy compiler is able to perform constraint solving (unifying the constraints with unification) to determine that both `x` and `y` are of type `bool`.

Now, imagine that the toy language includes addition expressions and the toy compiler encounters an addition expression `y + 1u64`. This would generate the constraint:

4. `y` has type `u64`

With these four constraints, the toy compiler is unable to perform unification, as the constraints are unable to be unified and generate a type error.

We can see that the toy compiler would be able to perform type inference for a whole program by generating a list of constraints and then unifying these constraints.

(Type inference, constraint solving, and unification are defined here: https://papl.cs.brown.edu/2014/Type_Inference.html)

## Declaration Engine

The declaration engine takes the concept of constraints and unification and applies it to declarations.

For example, when type checking a function application, the compiler does not need to care about the contents of the body of the function, instead it is sufficient to create a constraint referring to "the return type of the function".

> For example, given a typed function declaration `add`, we add this declaration to the declaration engine. Then when type checking a function application of `add`, instead of inlining the function body, we create constraints referring to "the body of `add`" and "the return type of `add`". When type checking a _function application_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, given a typed function declaration `add`, we add this declaration to the declaration engine. Then when type checking a function application of `add`, instead of inlining the function body, we create constraints referring to "the body of `add`" and "the return type of `add`". When type checking a _function application_.
```

Reviewer: Would the type of the body of the function not be the same as the return type of the function? I would think that the only constraints that would matter would be those of the function inputs, the type parameters, and then that of the function return type.

# Reference-level explanation

[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

This design will take after the design of the [type engine](https://github.com/FuelLabs/sway/blob/2816c13698a35752136d4843dbfe5e1b95c26e10/sway-core/src/type_engine/engine.rs#L14). During type checking, the compiler will add information about declarations to the declaration engine. Then, in places where that declaration is used, a value representing that declaration can be generated in place of inlining the declaration.

### Definition

During type checking of a declaration, the compiler will add information about that declaration to the declaration engine:

```rust
struct DeclarationEngine {
    // function name to typed function declaration

>     // this example code does not consider Path's, but we could use
>     // a BTreeMap with Path's as the key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // a BTreeMap with Path's as the key
```
```suggestion
    // this example code does not consider Paths, but we could use
    // a BTreeMap with Paths as the key
```

>     functions: HashMap<String, TypedFunctionDeclaration>,

Reviewer: my 2 cents: I prefer strong types like `FunctionName`, so we can modularly define the key type later

Author: 👍

    // struct name to typed struct declaration

>     // again, this does not consider Path's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // again, this does not consider Paths
```

>     structs: HashMap<String, TypedStructDeclaration>,

Reviewer: ditto re strongly typed key, `StructName` or similar

>     // enums and traits

Reviewer: TODO?

Reviewer: maybe say `omitted` or something?

Author: Good call.

}

impl DeclarationEngine {

>     fn add_function(&mut self, function: TypedFunctionDeclaration) -> DeclarationDefinition {

Reviewer: If the function has to be typed when we insert it into the declaration, doesn't that mean we maintain the status quo of having to type check (and perform inference on) everything before beginning this process?

        // add to self and return DeclarationDefinition
    }

    fn add_struct(&mut self, r#struct: TypedStructDeclaration) -> DeclarationDefinition {
        // add to self and return DeclarationDefinition
    },

    // enums and traits
}

enum DeclarationDefinition {

>     // does not consider Path's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // does not consider Paths
```

    Function(String),

>     // does not consider Path's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // does not consider Paths
```

    Struct(String),

    // enums and traits
}
```

> Then in the typed AST, that declarations could look like (in pseudocode):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then in the typed AST, those declarations could look like (in pseudocode):
```

```rust
contract;

/// imports

> DeclarationDefinition::Function(<function name>)

Reviewer: perhaps this code is too pseudo for me, I don't quite understand it. Are these are representing imports?

DeclarationDefinition::Struct(<struct name>)

/// storage declaration

DeclarationDefinition::Function("main")

```

> Because inlining is still needed for the IR, these instances of `DeclarationDefinition` would be replaced in an additional step at the end of type checking called the [resolution step](https://github.com/FuelLabs/sway/issues/1820).

Reviewer 2: Inlining isn't really needed for the backend and the resolution step you link to there is more about confirming that the AST is fully resolved/unified, no unknown types remain.

Is this a third definition of 'inlining'?  :slightly_smiling_face: 'Ensuring all generic types are replaced with concrete types'?

The back end just wants low level consistent fully-qualified naming for declarations and references.  So, for functions in a module it's easy -- `crate::module::fn_name` -- but for e.g., trait methods it's harder.  When we call `foo_bar.into()` we need a `crate::module::concrete_impl::into` name to call.

### Usage

> When a declaration is _used_ an internal reference is created that references the existence of a possible declaration in the declaration engine, and that is resolved during the resolution step. Given:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a declaration is referred to, a reference to the existence of a possible declaration in the declaration engine is generated. That is resolved during the resolution step. Given:
```

```rust
fn add(x: u64, y: u64) -> u64 {
    ..
}
```

The `TypedFunctionDeclaration` for `add` is added to the declaration engine. Then given:

```rust
let foo = add(1, 2);
```

> `foo` will be a `TypedExpression` with a [`TypedExpressionVariant::FunctionApplication`](https://github.com/FuelLabs/sway/blob/dcaee960df9b3466c6897d0a86ea806c9abf7edd/sway-core/src/semantic_analysis/ast_node/expression/typed_expression_variant.rs#L18), where instead of storing the entire `TypedFunctionDeclaration` in the `TypedExpressionVariant::FunctionApplication` variant, there is a reference created `Function("add", vec!(u64, u64))` which is stored [here](https://github.com/FuelLabs/sway/blob/dcaee960df9b3466c6897d0a86ea806c9abf7edd/sway-core/src/semantic_analysis/ast_node/expression/typed_expression_variant.rs#L23). The type of `foo` is some new `TypeInfo::ReturnType("add", vec!(u64, u64))`. Both the reference `Function("add", vec!(u64, u64))` and `TypeInfo::ReturnType("add", vec!(u64, u64))` are resolved during the resolution step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`foo` will be a `TypedExpression` with a [`TypedExpressionVariant::FunctionApplication`](https://github.com/FuelLabs/sway/blob/dcaee960df9b3466c6897d0a86ea806c9abf7edd/sway-core/src/semantic_analysis/ast_node/expression/typed_expression_variant.rs#L18), where instead of storing the entire `TypedFunctionDeclaration` in the `TypedExpressionVariant::FunctionApplication` variant, there is a reference created `Function("add", vec![u64, u64])` which is stored [here](https://github.com/FuelLabs/sway/blob/dcaee960df9b3466c6897d0a86ea806c9abf7edd/sway-core/src/semantic_analysis/ast_node/expression/typed_expression_variant.rs#L23). The type of `foo` is some new `TypeInfo::ReturnType("add", vec![u64, u64])`. Both the reference `Function("add", vec![u64, u64])` and `TypeInfo::ReturnType("add", vec![u64, u64])` are resolved during the resolution step.
```

> Importantly, introducing the declartion engine in this way means that during type checking before the resolution step, the references introduced during usages of declarations are assumptions. There is no check happening to ensure that `add` exists when creating `Function("add", vec!(u64, u64))`. The check to see if something exists happens in the resolution step. Once the _collection context_ is introduced, the concept of checking to see if things exist can happen significantly sooner, even before type checking begins at all, if we wanted to do so.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Importantly, introducing the declaration engine in this way means that during type checking before the resolution step, the references introduced during usages of declarations are assumptions. There is no check happening to ensure that `add` exists when creating `Function("add", vec!(u64, u64))`. The check to see if something exists happens in the resolution step. Once the _collection context_ is introduced, the concept of checking to see if things exist can happen significantly sooner, even before type checking begins at all, if we wanted to do so.
```

> Importantly, introducing the declartion engine in this way means that during type checking before the resolution step, the references introduced during usages of declarations are assumptions. There is no check happening to ensure that `add` exists when creating `Function("add", vec!(u64, u64))`. The check to see if something exists happens in the resolution step. Once the _collection context_ is introduced, the concept of checking to see if things exist can happen significantly sooner, even before type checking begins at all, if we wanted to do so.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Importantly, introducing the declartion engine in this way means that during type checking before the resolution step, the references introduced during usages of declarations are assumptions. There is no check happening to ensure that `add` exists when creating `Function("add", vec!(u64, u64))`. The check to see if something exists happens in the resolution step. Once the _collection context_ is introduced, the concept of checking to see if things exist can happen earlier in compilation, even before type checking begins at all, if we wanted to do so.
```

# Drawbacks

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

I believe that the only drawbacks are developer time and implementation complexity.

# Rationale and alternatives

[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

I feel that this design offers the best compromise between current state and future growth. The concept of a "declaration engine" in general is very broad, which is a good thing! The design in this RFC is a good one to get us started, but I imagine that as the language progresses, it's needs and use cases for the declaration engine will expand and change. Introducing the declaration engine now gives us the opportunity to create a mechanism through which some of those changes could be introduced later down the road.

That being said, from a high-level perspective, the alternative design would be something similar to what we are doing now, which is more focused on inlining things.

# Prior art

[prior-art]: #prior-art

> Well, I'm actually not sure. Off the top of my head, at a high-level there are languages that do not inline functions and instead use function tables, for instance. In those languages, I'm really not sure if this is done via a "declaration engine" or not. This RFC will not allow us to avoid inlining functions (we are still doing it in the IR), but it is a first step.

Reviewer: I believe we should do at least some research before diving in, given this is a multi month journey 😄  Here are some links I think may be good starting points:
1. [rustc item collection for monomorphization](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/compiler/rustc_monomorphize/src/collector.rs)
2. [rustc collection item context](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/compiler/rustc_typeck/src/collect.rs#L105)
3. maybe helpful, maybe not, as Idris is higher level...but [idris has a context it uses to resolve types](https://github.com/idris-lang/Idris2/blob/main/src/Core/Context/Context.idr#L417)
4. Maybe @tritao has thoughts here? It seems he wrote [something similar](https://github.com/tritao/CppSharp/blob/master/src/AST/ASTContext.cs) in his older project.
